# Diabetic-Retinopathy-Detection
Due to digitalization, the software sector has grown significantly since the corona virus outbreak. Up to 2017, there were over 2.75 million software engineers available in India. Nonetheless, this figure will rise to 5.2 million by 2023. When they use a computer for extended periods of time, the majority of software developers experience eye sight issues. In India, there are currently about 80 million people with diabetes, and by 2045, this can be projected to be 135 million. The software engineer’s eye sight issues could be more severe if they also have diabetes. Diabetic Retinopathy is the condition that results when a person has both diabetes and poor vision. Diabetic retinopathy affects about 30% of diabetes patients. The majority of people in the working age group around the world are affected by diabetic retinopathy, which is the greatest frequent factor of preventable loss of vision. In order to quickly identify, diagnose, and treat diabetic retinopathy before it worsens, we intend to create a deep learning model to do so. By extracting two features from retinal images Micron way, which is discovered to be the first symptom-showing feature, and Haemorrhage, which exhibits symptoms of further stages this seeks to discover the disease at the earliest stage feasible.
There are several issues with diabetes, one of which is diabetic retinopathy, which affects the eyes. It can cause total blindness and vision loss in severe cases. Some among the first signs of diabetic retinopathy include eye floaters, fuzzy vision, darkened portions of eyesight, and difficulty seeing colour. If you want to avoid going blind, you must correctly diagnose diabetic retinopathy in its early stages. Tiny red spots can be seen in the retina during the earliest phases that is non-proliferative. Those tiny patches might be haemorrhage, irregular blood vessel pouching might be microaneurysms. The linings of these blood arteries are vulnerable to damage, allowing fluid and fatty material known as exudates to spill out. Diabetic retinopathy can be diagnosed using pupil enlargement, a visual acuity screening, CT using optical coherence, and other physical exams. Yet, they are time-consuming and painful for the patients.
Deep learning falls into the subclass of machine learning which is basically a 3- or many- patterned neural network. In order to learn from vast volumes of data, artificial neural networks attempt to simulate that how individual brain processes. Although a network just with a single level would generate approximations, additional hidden layers would improve tune and maximize overall efficiency. Deep learning is the motivating factor behind several AI services and programs that enhance mechanisation via performing mental and mechanical activities without human involvement. CNN is a deep learning strategy that can recognise data with a grid layout, such as photographs. CNN was designed with the animal visual brain in mind, and it is intended to gain spatial feature ordering, patterns that vary from basic to high standard, instantly and flexibly. A traditional CNN is made up of 3 sorts of layers: convolution, pooling – to extract features, fully connected layer - moves these extracted features into the output.
In order to perform color normalization and remove retina background, a pre-processing procedure is necessary since retinal pictures are typically not equally lit. By calculating the backdrop picture and deducting it from the actual image, this step was completed. The prepared patch is fed into the convolution, max pooling, and fully connected layers of the fundamental CNN. The probability map over which selection is conducted and which is used as input by CNN to create the desired output is the produced output.
In this project, we employed CNN for retinal image categorization using the ResNet50 model, which enhances the categorization of microaneurysms and haemorrhage and classifies the phases of illnesses. It will take a lot of time for medical professionals to study and find diabetic retinopathy using retinal images using laborious manual approaches. So, an automated system can considerably minimize the labor required for diagnosing big numbers of retinal images, and we can acquire the results faster so that the treatment can begin earlier. Large numbers of retinal images can also be processed faster, which lowers the cost.
